[Amit Varma]: What is India's population? If you Google it, the number you will get is just over 1.3
[Amit Varma]: billion people. But is that the real number? Think of it this way. Almost half of that
[Amit Varma]: number is women. And in our country, women are treated as second class citizens. In most
[Amit Varma]: of India, it's understood that a woman's destiny is to one day get married and raise a family.
[Amit Varma]: The education of women, the education of girls rather, or their skilling, is not given enough
[Amit Varma]: importance. And if they do ever end up getting into the workforce, they are already at a
[Amit Varma]: huge disadvantage. Simply put, half the productive resources of our country are not treated as
[Amit Varma]: productive resources at all. In fact, all our citizens are condescended to and restrained
[Amit Varma]: by a parasitic Maybab government. And whatever we achieve as a society is in spite of the
[Amit Varma]: state. But leave that aside for the moment. My point is that because of the way we treat
[Amit Varma]: our women, we are functioning at any given point in time, at just half our capacity,
[Amit Varma]: at best. And this is not just a function of our cultural norms. This is embedded in the
[Unknown]: law. Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics
[Amit Varma]: and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma. Welcome to The Scene and
[Amit Varma]: the Unseen. Before we begin, a word from the sponsor of this episode, and indeed the last
[Amit Varma]: few episodes. Indian Colors is a company that licenses art from contemporary Indian artists
[Amit Varma]: and adapts it to objects of everyday use. They have home decor, like cushion covers
[Amit Varma]: and table runners. They have accessories like tote bags. And what I particularly like is
[Amit Varma]: their wearables, their kaftans, shrugs and stoles. This allows people like me, who can't
[Amit Varma]: actually afford to buy expensive paintings to hang on the walls, to surround myself with
[Amit Varma]: art at an affordable price. And even wear some of it, their kaftans are damn comfortable.
[Amit Varma]: Artists get royalties on each product sold, just like authors do for books. And some of
[Amit Varma]: their artists include Sameer Mondal, Dhruvi Acharya, Brinda Miller, Shruti Nelson and
[Amit Varma]: Harin Vakil. They've just got a new collection of stoles out with some funky designs by Deepak
[Amit Varma]: Shinde and Dilip Sharma. You must check that out. Head on over to IndianColors.com, that's
[Amit Varma]: Colors with an OU, to check out their offerings and use the code IVM20. That's IVM for Indus
[Amit Varma]: Fox Media, 20, IVM20, for a 20% discount. IVM20 is a code at IndianColors.com, Colors
[Amit Varma]: with an OU. And now, on to today's episode. Later this week, on March 8th, we have something
[Amit Varma]: called Women's Day. On the same day, as it happens, a Supreme Court hearing is scheduled
[Amit Varma]: of the infamous Hadiya case. Now, it's long been my case that our laws are deeply misogynistic.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I'll launch into a rant about this at the start of my conversation in this episode.
[Amit Varma]: And many of these are laws in the Indian Penal Code framed in the 19th century by the British.
[Amit Varma]: One could argue that they exist today only because of the inertia of the system. Well,
[Amit Varma]: it is my case that such misogyny exists not just in outdated laws, but also in the minds
[Amit Varma]: of lawmakers and the judiciary today. And the Hadiya case is but one example of that.
[Amit Varma]: My guests on the show today are two friends of mine who feel as strongly about this as
[Amit Varma]: I do. Madhav Chandravarkar is a lawyer, a legal expert and a fellow at the Takshashila
[Amit Varma]: Institution in Bangalore. And he suggested the topic for today's episode. Hamsini Hariharan
[Amit Varma]: is my colleague at Pragati, the magazine I edit at thinkpragati.com and herself the host
[Amit Varma]: of a fantastic podcast called the Pragati Podcast. Here's a conversation I had with
[Unknown]: them.
[Amit Varma]: Hamsini, Madhav, welcome to the show.
[Guest 1]: Thanks so much, Amit.
[Guest 1]: Thanks Amit.
[Amit Varma]: For my listeners, I should inform you that Hamsini also hosts an excellent podcast called
[Amit Varma]: the Pragati Podcast at thinkpragati.com. So do check that out. And because she's such
[Amit Varma]: a great host, and especially because she knows a lot more than I do about the subject at
[Amit Varma]: hand today, I've requested her to co-host the show with me, which doesn't mean she'll
[Amit Varma]: only be asking questions. She's got some great insights in the subjects. But apart from that,
[Amit Varma]: she will also know what are the right questions to ask Madhav. Now, before I dive into this
[Amit Varma]: episode, I just want to go on a bit of a rant. I did an episode a few weeks ago with your
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila colleague Manasa Venkatraman on how prostitution should be legalized. Aside
[Amit Varma]: the subject of that, one of the things we examined in that episode was a misogyny in
[Amit Varma]: the Indian laws. And these are laws that I mean, this is the Indian Penal Code, which
[Amit Varma]: we inherited from the British. So very briefly, there's 497 adultery. Now this is I'm not
[Amit Varma]: going to read this out because it has victorial language, which is an aesthetic affront to
[Amit Varma]: my editorial sensibilities. But the upshot of this is that when adultery is committed,
[Amit Varma]: the male adulterer who has slept with the wife of someone else is considered at fault
[Amit Varma]: because he slept with that woman without the consent of her husband, as if she is a husband's
[Amit Varma]: property. And there's this another law 498, which is enticing or taking away or detaining
[Amit Varma]: with criminal intent, a married woman, which really amounts to saying the same thing. I
[Amit Varma]: encourage you to look these up. But basically, she has no agency whatsoever. Now, this might
[Amit Varma]: seem like an old story. Okay, these are really old laws. We've got them from two centuries
[Amit Varma]: ago from the British. But the misogyny that is reflected in these ancient laws carries
[Amit Varma]: down to the present day in the mindset of our lawmakers and our judiciary. And that's
[Amit Varma]: what we're talking about today.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, we still have a Victorian morality that's sort of reflected in our laws, even though
[Guest 1]: it's two centuries later. But Madhav, you're the lawyer in the room, right? So suppose
[Guest 1]: I'm married, and my husband is committing adultery or flirting with another woman, then
[Guest 2]: can I initiate charges against him?
[Guest 2]: No, I was just about to interject when Amit was saying, you don't have any right to initiate
[Guest 2]: criminal proceedings against your husband for sleeping with another man's wife.
[Amit Varma]: But a husband would be able to initiate.
[Guest 1]: And that's because I don't count in this equation. Is that how it works?
[Guest 2]: Well, yeah, I mean, your agency is irrelevant, because not only can you not object if your
[Guest 2]: husband sleeps around with another woman, you can't object if your husband decides to
[Guest 1]: sleep with you against your consent.
[Guest 1]: That's true. Marital rape is an inherent problem. And agency is something that I think we're
[Guest 1]: going to be referring through all of this podcast, because whether it's in society and
[Guest 1]: apparently by law, a woman's agency in India is of very, very little value. But moving
[Guest 1]: on from adultery to the very recent cases, Amit, Madhav and I were talking about the
[Guest 1]: triple talaq judgment recently, and how it's supposed to be a champion of women and particularly
[Guest 1]: Muslim women. So does it live up to everything it's supposed to be a champion of?
[Guest 2]: Not really, because the grounds which they used to dismiss triple talaq were not really
[Guest 2]: about the decisional autonomy of the women involved, but just a question of whether it
[Guest 2]: was a quote, unquote, essential religious practice in Muslim personal law. So they said
[Guest 2]: that it wasn't. And therefore, it was could be subject to constitutional scrutiny. When
[Guest 2]: I think the reasoning that they should have gone with was that regardless of whether it's
[Guest 2]: an essential part of a religion or not, any religious practice must subscribe and fall
[Guest 2]: under constitutional principles like equality, and the right to life, to which triple talaq
[Guest 2]: clearly does not and that should have been the argument that they made, but they didn't.
[Amit Varma]: Your broader point there is that and this is something the Constitution should really
[Amit Varma]: have made clear that there are no exceptions at all to the values in the Constitution,
[Amit Varma]: whatever religious practices any of our religions might have, if they go against the principles
[Amit Varma]: we outlined in the Constitution, then they're unlawful period, right?
[Guest 2]: So, that would be an idealistic and the preferable way of interpreting it, but that is unfortunately
[Guest 2]: not the current legal position in practice.
[Guest 1]: Okay, so the judiciary basically passed the buck onto the parliament, right?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, meaning they said that while they've pronounced on this, nothing prevents the parliament
[Guest 1]: from passing a law.
[Guest 2]: Okay, so what did the parliament then do?
[Guest 2]: So the parliament saw this as a clear opportunity, perhaps to reap political benefits, I don't
[Guest 2]: know, but they passed a triple talaq bill, as it is colloquially known, the actual title
[Guest 2]: is the Muslim Women Protection of Rights on Marriage Bill.
[Guest 2]: Okay, so judging by that title, you would think that they deal with not only triple
[Guest 2]: talaq, but all the various issues that Muslim women and Muslim women groups have been talking
[Guest 2]: about for a while, like polygamy or nikkah halala.
[Guest 2]: But there's no mention of those practices at all.
[Guest 2]: And the Muslim women groups were not consulted in the actual construction of the bill, nor
[Guest 2]: were their comments actively sought, which makes you question whether the bill was actually
[Guest 2]: to protect Muslim women or not.
[Guest 2]: Maybe they had some more nefarious ulterior motives.
[Amit Varma]: It sounds like the legislature mansplaining as a whole to Muslim women that you are pronouncing
[Amit Varma]: something that is supposed to be in their favor to benefit them, but you don't actually
[Amit Varma]: consult them.
[Amit Varma]: They're not a party at the table.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, it's a we know best approach.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I mean, again, this is about agency of Muslim women, right?
[Guest 1]: If they're not consulted, if the bill is being passed only on one front and does not take
[Guest 1]: into all their other concerns, then it's not really the progressive bill that they're posturing
[Guest 1]: it as, which makes me wonder, is this even about women?
[Guest 1]: This debate doesn't seem to be about women at all.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: In which case you wonder, then why bring the bill about?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we can speculate on what the intent might be.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe they're posturing to their base.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe it's all just optics and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But the fact that the people directly affected by the bill, on whose behalf you claim to
[Amit Varma]: be speaking, aren't actually a party at the table.
[Amit Varma]: The most important stakeholder isn't consulted.
[Amit Varma]: Seems bizarre to me and a continuation of how women are constantly considered not capable
[Amit Varma]: of agency and treated in a patronizing way.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, that's the thing.
[Guest 1]: This is not something that's new, again, in Indian society or law, I'm guessing.
[Guest 1]: Because women are generally seen as, you know, malleable, for example.
[Guest 1]: And there was a more recent case, wasn't it?
[Guest 1]: Was it the Farooqui case?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, Mahmood Farooqui, the co director of Peopley Life.
[Guest 2]: So he was convicted by the trial court, but it was overturned by the High Court on extremely
[Guest 2]: weak grounds, where basically, they tried to be woke in many ways, they tried to talk
[Guest 2]: about global debates about affirmative consent and whatnot.
[Guest 2]: But then they also have a sentence that basically says sometimes a no means a yes.
[Guest 1]: Wait, mother, take a step back, what is the case?
[Guest 2]: What happened?
[Guest 2]: So the case was that there was a international scholar from Columbia who'd come to do some
[Guest 2]: research, she'd gotten in touch with someone to speak to Mahmood Farooqui, because he is
[Guest 2]: one of the premier people on the Dastogi.
[Guest 2]: Dastan Goi.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, if I remember correctly, she was introduced by Danish Hussain, who's a friend
[Amit Varma]: who used to run Dastan Goi along with Mahmood Farooqui.
[Amit Varma]: And despite being a close friend of Mahmood Farooqui became a witness for the prosecution.
[Guest 2]: Okay, exactly.
[Guest 2]: So, so she'd gotten in touch, they'd met a couple of times, I think most of the times
[Guest 2]: that the scholar and Farooqui had met, he had been inebriated.
[Guest 2]: So there were some prior instances of him being inebriated before the actual event took
[Guest 2]: place.
[Guest 2]: Plus, I think they seem to have a mutual attraction to one another.
[Guest 2]: I think they may have exchanged some kisses at a party.
[Guest 1]: How does any of this matter?
[Guest 1]: This is not a gossip rag.
[Guest 1]: But how is any of this pertinent to the Supreme Court judgment?
[Guest 2]: Exactly.
[Guest 2]: So it's pertinent to the High Court judgment, I'll get into the Supreme Court later.
[Guest 2]: But the High Court, this was basically Farooqui in the High Court, hired like the best lawyers,
[Amit Varma]: it was in the Delhi High Court.
[Amit Varma]: But let's first continue, let's first rewind and continue with the narrative you were telling
[Amit Varma]: us of what actually happened in the case.
[Guest 2]: Okay, so basically, they had these sort of interactions beforehand.
[Guest 2]: And then Farooqui invited her to come over, she was, and then to come over and Danish
[Guest 2]: would be accompanying them.
[Guest 2]: And then subsequently changed the invitation to say, Oh, I forgot, I have to go for a wedding.
[Guest 2]: So the scholars under the impression that she would be going to a wedding with Farooqui
[Guest 2]: and his wife.
[Guest 2]: However, when she reached, though the wife was there, two people were exiting beforehand,
[Guest 2]: people that she'd never met before.
[Guest 2]: And there was a short period where she was alone with Farooqui and Farooqui was described
[Guest 2]: as being extremely drunk.
[Guest 2]: She called Danish because I think she was a little unsure because this was the first
[Guest 2]: time that she'd met Farooqui where no one else was there.
[Guest 2]: All the other interactions, other people were present, whether it was at a party or not.
[Guest 2]: And he then said he was unable to come.
[Guest 2]: And then he was also extremely drunk.
[Guest 2]: He has admitted in the course of the proceedings and in interactions with her to be bipolar.
[Guest 2]: And he was crying and apparently was crying to the extent that he had snot in his mustache
[Guest 2]: and a very unappealing, is in a very unappealing state of, which is actually is made relevant
[Guest 2]: later on in the case.
[Guest 2]: So she describes having a very maternal feeling to him at that point that she wanted to take
[Guest 2]: care of him, ask him what his problems were.
[Guest 2]: He, on the other hand, wanted to get fresh and kept on saying, can I, I think, can I
[Guest 2]: suck you?
[Guest 2]: Can I suck you?
[Guest 2]: And she repeatedly tried to say no, that she thought it wouldn't be helpful to him in his
[Guest 2]: current state of mind.
[Guest 2]: He tried pulling down her clothes.
[Guest 2]: She pulled them back up and this happened.
[Guest 2]: And then finally, I think he got a little forceful, at least that's how she describes
[Guest 2]: it.
[Guest 2]: And she then decided that she, I think, was remembering Nirbhaya, which is a recent event
[Guest 2]: at the time.
[Guest 2]: And she decided that maybe things could get violent.
[Guest 2]: I'm just going to go along with this.
[Guest 2]: And she faked an orgasm to end the ordeal.
[Guest 2]: And she wanted to leave immediately.
[Guest 2]: But the two friends who were leaving the house as she came in, came back and there was some
[Guest 2]: back and forth about leaving in a cab or an auto, what was safe.
[Guest 2]: So she finally left 45 minutes later, at which point she immediately called Danish, recounted
[Guest 2]: the events to which this is an undisputed fact, both sides and the telephonic records
[Guest 2]: to attest to that.
[Guest 2]: And then a couple of days later, she sent a mail to Farrukhi saying that I have, I regard
[Guest 2]: you well, you're a good acquaintance, I like you and I love you and I want the best for
[Guest 2]: you.
[Guest 2]: But what you did was not acceptable.
[Guest 2]: I am a person who owns my, I think she meant sexuality, but in the letter it says sexually.
[Guest 2]: Or whatever.
[Guest 2]: She said that she was someone who took pride in making her own sexual decisions.
[Guest 2]: And that post this decision, she could no longer feel that she was facing trauma.
[Guest 2]: And she eventually left the US, after which she recuperated with her family and friends
[Guest 2]: a support system, and then finally worked up the courage to come back a couple of months
[Guest 2]: later and file a case against him.
[Amit Varma]: And if I'm not mistaken, he replied to this email and the email trail basically confirms
[Guest 2]: this version.
[Guest 2]: He says my sincerest apologies, though in the case, I think, with his expensive lawyers
[Guest 2]: came up with some argument and how he only read the first two lines.
[Guest 2]: And then that's the first two lines is what he expressed the my sincerest apologies comment
[Guest 2]: in the reply.
[Guest 2]: And but later in court said no, it was only to those first two sentences when I read the
[Guest 2]: entire thing.
[Guest 2]: No.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not an admission of guilt.
[Amit Varma]: That was pretty creative.
[Guest 2]: So coming back to, yeah, it does.
[Guest 2]: And in fact, it's only going to get more sickening because of the high court and the Supreme Court's
[Guest 2]: interpretation of these events.
[Guest 2]: So they employ what is a sort of a more legal version of the I'm not a racist, but argument
[Guest 2]: where they say it is irrelevant to the question of consent, whether she met with him earlier
[Guest 2]: and it kissed him.
[Guest 2]: But it happened, meaning if they kept on saying it was irrelevant, but then they kept on talking
[Amit Varma]: about it.
[Amit Varma]: So they keep saying that every time you use, but in a sentence that but invalidates everything
[Amit Varma]: before it and saying that it is irrelevant to the question of consent, but means you're
[Amit Varma]: basically saying it is relevant to the question of consent.
[Guest 2]: And that is shocking.
[Guest 2]: So the actual syntax of the argument is that the disclaimer, because their lawyers came
[Guest 2]: at the end.
[Guest 2]: So they said this is irrelevant to whether it is consent or not.
[Guest 2]: And then to the actual event that was the on which the case revolved around, the high
[Guest 2]: court took this argument that basically because she was and they were both educated people
[Guest 2]: of good letters, that if she actually didn't consent, she would have expressed that affirmatively.
[Guest 2]: And it completely negates all the academic studies and discussions around the various
[Guest 2]: power dynamics that are inherent in any sexual assault, which are irrespective of whether
[Guest 2]: you're educated or upper class or whatever sort of you want to say, this is something
[Guest 2]: that happens across all spectrums of society as Harvey Weinstein and the subsequent allegations
[Amit Varma]: prove in abundance.
[Guest 1]: As everybody knows, I mean, this is not something you need to prove.
[Guest 1]: So this reminds me of the time when I think post the Nirbhaya case, someone said, if someone
[Guest 1]: is harassing you, just call him Bhaiya and he'll stop.
[Guest 1]: And this is the same thing, you know, if she really meant no, why didn't she say it stronger?
[Guest 1]: And this is something that we say to women time and again, whenever they bring about
[Guest 1]: the questions of harassment, it goes, why didn't you do this?
[Guest 1]: Why didn't you get in touch with the police?
[Amit Varma]: Why didn't you scream for help?
[Amit Varma]: You know, in all the old cases coming out now that if this happened 15 years ago, why
[Amit Varma]: didn't you speak then?
[Guest 1]: Exactly.
[Guest 1]: Which I hear all the time.
[Guest 1]: And for example, they don't even take into consideration her fact that she is in immediate
[Guest 1]: danger, right?
[Guest 1]: If she says no forcefully, she has no clue what the guy would be doing to her.
[Guest 1]: Because it sounds like the Supreme Court judges at that point in time think she's a man.
[Guest 1]: And if she says no, someone's going to be like, oh, you meant no.
[Guest 1]: Okay, then.
[Guest 1]: All right.
[Guest 2]: Do you want a cup of tea?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest 2]: So there's complete disregard to the context in which the so-called consent was given.
[Guest 2]: And basically, all the onus is put on her to make sure that she is conveying to him
[Guest 2]: that she is not consenting.
[Guest 2]: So that is why the feeble no means yes argument basically amounts to that.
[Guest 2]: It's not the man's job to figure out why they've kissed a couple of times before.
[Guest 2]: So he thinks it's on.
[Guest 2]: So it's her responsibility to ensure that it was clear.
[Guest 2]: And the Supreme Court takes this to just unreasonable levels, because they say that the faking of
[Guest 2]: the orgasm was a sign of consent.
[Guest 2]: First of all, it happened at the end of the act.
[Guest 2]: So how can you say that it's consent when it happens after or during as opposed to before?
[Guest 2]: And then how is it got to do with anything clearly?
[Guest 2]: These judges must think that they are pleasing their wives at all times and that their wives
[Guest 2]: are never faked orgasm.
[Guest 2]: Fake orgasm is a mythical beast like a chimera.
[Guest 2]: I don't know what the background of their reasoning is, but it makes your blood boil.
[Guest 2]: And that's just me as a guy trying to sort of empathize with how women feel, I just cannot
[Guest 2]: even fathom how women would react to those kind of pronouns.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, and this may not be pertinent, but a lot of these arguments, why didn't she say
[Amit Varma]: no more forcefully?
[Amit Varma]: Why didn't she speak out before?
[Amit Varma]: Why did she stay for 45 minutes after that?
[Amit Varma]: A lot of these arguments seem to me to be made in bad faith, where you've already assumed
[Amit Varma]: that the woman is making shit up or overreacting or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And then you're finding clever ways to make an argument and prove that per se, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and of course, the burden of proof should always be on the accuser.
[Amit Varma]: But if you look at the email trail, and if you look at everything that happened, I thought
[Amit Varma]: this was an open and shut case, you know, clearly the man was guilty.
[Guest 2]: That's what I thought.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: And also, in the judgment, in the judgments rather, so they talk about how he had bipolar
[Guest 2]: disorder.
[Guest 2]: And typically in law, if you're going to play some kind of burden or duty on the woman to
[Guest 2]: make something clear, there's a standard of reasonableness.
[Guest 2]: So someone who has bipolar disorder would would not pass that test of reasonableness
[Guest 2]: because you would have to go above and beyond.
[Guest 2]: So the fact that he did not understand should be his fault and not hers.
[Guest 2]: Exactly.
[Guest 2]: And the other is that it was, it's part of the undisputed facts that he was pissed drunk,
[Guest 2]: which is another legal sort of standard for reducing the mental capacity of someone.
[Guest 2]: So all the burden is placed on the woman to convince someone who is of a doubly unsound
[Guest 2]: mind.
[Guest 2]: And it's just bizarre how it's all on her.
[Guest 1]: No, you know, this brings to mind the stereotype that academic feminism talks about called
[Guest 1]: the ideal rape victim.
[Guest 1]: Your ideal rape victim would have never met her assaulter or harasser.
[Guest 1]: Your ideal rape victim is chaste and pure and conforms to your normal societal norms
[Guest 1]: in every sense.
[Guest 1]: Your ideal rape victim will be emotional in court.
[Guest 1]: So for example, there was a study that looked at how jurors reacted to different rape cases.
[Guest 1]: And in cases where the woman was calm or not expressive of her emotions, the jurors were
[Guest 1]: less inclined to believe her testament because if she had been raped, then she should be
[Guest 1]: crying.
[Guest 1]: So this is also about the way we think of women, right?
[Guest 1]: I mean, Pink is a movie that's criticized on several accounts.
[Guest 1]: But again, the thing that was shown there is that none of these girls were ideal victims,
[Guest 1]: right?
[Guest 1]: If they were educated, then why are they going out to meet these men?
[Guest 1]: Why are they stepping out of the norms of our ideal woman type?
[Guest 1]: This is not even the ideal rape woman.
[Guest 1]: This is the ideal Indian woman.
[Guest 1]: Why are these women going beyond that?
[Guest 1]: The second thing that I want to bring about is the idea that everyone is talking about
[Guest 1]: with respect to consent, which is the gray area, the gray area, which seems like a post
[Guest 1]: modernist construct says, oh, you never know where consent is.
[Guest 1]: This for example, is not a gray area.
[Guest 1]: This is a very black and white.
[Amit Varma]: This is as black and white as it can get.
[Amit Varma]: And it should be no, should always mean no.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing here is that no one will ever imply that a man's no could mean no or yes.
[Amit Varma]: But if it's a woman's no, it's up to the man to interpret it.
[Amit Varma]: And by chance, if he makes a mistake, well, then you'll make all kinds of clever arguments
[Guest 1]: later.
[Guest 1]: Yes.
[Guest 1]: I mean, there is now a paradigm that people are saying that, you know, maybe instead of
[Guest 1]: looking at no means no, we should look at enthusiastic consent.
[Guest 1]: In the sense, only if a woman says yes, are you allowed to either flirt with her or be
[Guest 1]: intimate with her, which seems like a much better paradigm because people clearly don't
[Guest 1]: understand what you're saying.
[Guest 1]: And other points that I'm going to bring up is in India, the culture of consent.
[Guest 1]: So if I invite you to dinner, Amit, and we're very close friends, and you just don't want
[Guest 1]: to come, it doesn't matter what your reasons are.
[Guest 1]: Because it's the both of us, you'll say, no, I'm not coming and I'll be like, it's fine.
[Guest 1]: But if it's anyone else, you'll go, actually, you know, I have work and then I have to do
[Guest 1]: this thing.
[Guest 1]: And I have all these errands that I can't go.
[Guest 1]: And this is between the both of us.
[Guest 1]: And you're saying this because if I just hear a no without any explanation, I will just
[Guest 1]: be pissed off.
[Guest 1]: We have a culture in Indian society that does not take no for an answer.
[Guest 1]: And this is even, I think this adds a layer of complexity that consent doesn't have in
[Guest 1]: the West.
[Amit Varma]: People are trained to say no socially.
[Amit Varma]: This is a fantastic point.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not only relevant to like, intergender relationships.
[Amit Varma]: But even if you ask someone for directions on the street, he will very rarely say no,
[Amit Varma]: I don't know where it is.
[Amit Varma]: He will give you wrong directions rather than admit that he doesn't have that knowledge,
[Amit Varma]: which probably also is a male problem.
[Guest 1]: No, it's not only a male problem, right?
[Guest 1]: I mean, even within genders, with respect to people who are older than you, it's just
[Guest 1]: Oh, why do you want to offend them?
[Guest 1]: It's because in Indian culture, people do not take no seriously.
[Guest 1]: And when you bring it down to consent, it's even more dire.
[Guest 1]: Because a case like this, which is, as you said, clearly an open and shut case is being
[Guest 1]: interpreted, I don't even know in such a twisted manner.
[Guest 2]: And to me, the most disturbing argument is that they sort of flip a lot of these discussions,
[Guest 2]: which are sort of more feminist and pro women, and use it to justify their decision.
[Guest 2]: So for example, there's a passage in the judgment that this is a high court judgment where the
[Guest 2]: normal construct is that the man is the initiator of sexual interaction.
[Guest 2]: He performs the active part, whereas a woman is, by and large, nonverbal.
[Guest 2]: First of all, it should have been passive.
[Guest 2]: I don't understand this nonverbal, like just what the hell, like, what are you even trying
[Guest 2]: to imply over there?
[Guest 2]: But however, and they talk about how this is sort of become socialized in gender roles
[Guest 2]: or whatever.
[Guest 2]: However, in today's modern world, with equality being the buzzword, such may not be the case.
[Guest 1]: Equality is a buzzword, you guys.
[Amit Varma]: It's a buzzword now, like, like stoles are in fashion.
[Guest 2]: And then they like eventually, basically say that because the woman's role is no longer
[Guest 2]: passive, that it was her responsibility to clarify.
[Guest 1]: This is a high court trying to be woke and failing very miserably.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: And, and ultimately, like they, it's, as I said, it's, I'm not racist, but so they try
[Guest 2]: and they talk about these debates on affirmative consent.
[Guest 2]: But then towards the end of the judgment, they talk about four circumstances in which
[Guest 2]: the memory recollection of a witness can be inaccurate.
[Guest 2]: And there is some, there's scientific basis to those claims, but, and they go through
[Guest 2]: the four instances or the four circumstances, which are one, if the observation took place
[Guest 2]: in a poor environment, bad lighting, distance away from the event.
[Guest 2]: The second is the sort of mental makeup of the observer.
[Guest 2]: And they say, we'll go into this in detail later.
[Guest 2]: And then the third is what happens in between the event and the recollection and how the
[Guest 2]: recollection happens, which is the fourth with leading questions and such.
[Guest 2]: So they go through all these four circumstances in which memory can be inaccurate, but then
[Guest 2]: fail to apply it to the prosecutor.
[Guest 1]: Exactly.
[Guest 1]: At the end, you're telling me they ruled in the favor of a man who claims that he's bipolar
[Guest 1]: and was visibly drunk and use that in his favor.
[Guest 2]: And there's a sentence, this is towards just before they give the actual judgment, but
[Guest 2]: it remains in doubt as to whether such an incident as has been narrated by the prosecutors
[Guest 2]: took place.
[Guest 2]: And if at all it had taken place, it was without the consent will of the prosecutors.
[Guest 2]: And if it was without the consent of the prosecutors, whether the appellant could discern, understand
[Guest 2]: the same.
[Amit Varma]: So they attack a statement on three levels.
[Amit Varma]: And the third level is the most absurd that it's like saying that even if she said, no,
[Amit Varma]: if he wasn't in a state of mind that he could understand it, his actions are justified.
[Guest 1]: Really?
[Guest 1]: This is like that pleading that he's insane.
[Guest 1]: They are pleading that he's insane.
[Guest 1]: Or stupid.
[Guest 2]: Actually, it's the last point is only something that commentators say they talk about him
[Guest 2]: being drunk and they talk about him being bipolar, but nowhere does that factor into
[Guest 2]: the discussions of his mental capacity at the time.
[Amit Varma]: And also, even if they explain, they do not exculpate what actually happened.
[Guest 2]: Let's, I mean, this is, I mean, especially with law, because if you are intoxicated by
[Guest 2]: your own will, that is not a defense.
[Guest 2]: Exactly.
[Guest 2]: It's only if you have been sort of slipped a roofie or something like that, where you
[Guest 2]: can claim intoxication as something that protects you from criminal offense.
[Amit Varma]: So this is like another case where, you know, the woman's consent and her agency is completely
[Guest 2]: disregarded.
[Guest 2]: So, no, and just to end with the Supreme Court, which recently dismissed the appeal of the
[Guest 2]: High Court judgment by the woman in question, where they said it was a well-reasoned argument.
[Guest 2]: I don't know on what basis they are saying that.
[Guest 2]: When they were speaking to the counselor for the prosecutrix, it was hilarious in many
[Guest 2]: ways because they said, okay, let's get down to the legal question.
[Guest 2]: It is clear that they have some relationship between the two.
[Guest 2]: And so then the Vrinda Grover said, no, meaning they knew each other, but they were not really,
[Guest 2]: they did not have a relationship.
[Guest 2]: So then they said, no, no, no, no, we didn't mean relationship in the colloquial sense,
[Guest 2]: but then what was, that was not the obvious inference of what you said earlier.
[Guest 2]: Then they made the point on the fake orgasm being consent, which was just absurd.
[Guest 2]: And finally, in that letter that she sent two days later, they focused on just the statement
[Guest 2]: that she said, I love you.
[Guest 2]: They did not agree with your grammatical interpretation of the word but, because there was a but that
[Guest 2]: came later, but they said, oh, which kind of rape victim later says, no, the exact question,
[Guest 2]: ma'am, you are someone familiar with the rape cases in what kind of rape case, give me an
[Guest 2]: instance of rape cases where the victim says, I love you later to the accused.
[Guest 2]: Well, pretty, I know it's a rhetorical question, but pretty much every marital rape in this
[Guest 2]: country.
[Guest 2]: No, she answered, there are lots of cases say with the example of incest, at which point
[Guest 1]: the judge said, no, no, no, no, it's okay, don't get into that.
[Guest 2]: So then she said, like, I'm only getting into it because you asked me.
[Guest 2]: And so they basically dismissed the special leave petition, the appeal, because she said,
[Guest 2]: I love you later, despite the fact that she said, I love you, but what you did was unexcusable
[Guest 2]: and traumatized.
[Guest 2]: I did not give consent.
[Amit Varma]: This is meaningless.
[Amit Varma]: And the very fact that that question was asked to Vrinda Grover indicates a severe lack of
[Amit Varma]: understanding and empathy on the point of the person asking it that like, come on, don't
[Guest 1]: you get what she's been through so far, hasn't she been through enough without also having
[Guest 2]: to face this and understand.
[Guest 2]: So yeah, that's one thing I just like, as disturbing and sort of blood boiling as the
[Guest 2]: High Court judgment is concerned, at least they took the time to go through it in detail
[Guest 2]: and came up with like a very shitty end product.
[Guest 2]: But at least they said, okay, this is something worthy of our time.
[Guest 2]: All of what I said about the Supreme Court happened in a matter of 20 to 30 minutes where
[Amit Varma]: they dismissed it.
[Amit Varma]: Staggering.
[Amit Varma]: Let's, let's move on now to the other big case before the Supreme Court.
[Guest 1]: Please tell me that there is some light at the end of the tunnel, Madhav, please tell
[Guest 2]: me, no, no, because it gets darker, we are going to talk about Hadiya now.
[Guest 2]: Because at the end, Vrinda Grover asked, can you at least say that this case is peculiar
[Guest 2]: to only these facts and it is not laid down an interpretation of consent?
[Amit Varma]: Supreme Court said nothing to it.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on now to talking about more darkness at the end of the tunnel.
[Amit Varma]: That's the Hadiya case.
[Guest 2]: So the Hadiya case is a perfect example of how the posturing does not equal the reality
[Guest 2]: because it is a case that should have been dismissed at the very earliest stage.
[Guest 2]: Ideally, what should have happened is at the moment it reached the Supreme Court, the Supreme
[Guest 2]: Court said, okay, this is about whether Hadiya married with consent or not.
[Guest 2]: Hadiya, why don't you come here?
[Guest 2]: We'll ask you.
[Guest 2]: It took like three to four proceedings to even get to that stage.
[Guest 2]: And then just, it's rife, the Supreme Court were the ones who ordered the NIA probe.
[Guest 2]: How is that relevant?
[Guest 2]: The Supreme Court were the ones who remanded her to the custody of the warden.
[Guest 2]: This is a 24 year old woman.
[Guest 2]: Custody should not be part of the equation at all.
[Amit Varma]: Let's rewind a little bit and give a TLDR or a quick summary of what the Hadiya case
[Amit Varma]: actually was.
[Amit Varma]: Basically, in two sentences, this woman chose to marry someone she fell in love with.
[Amit Varma]: And she's a consenting adult.
[Amit Varma]: She married him and she changed her religion.
[Amit Varma]: And then her parents and various other interest groups went to court against the Kerala High
[Guest 1]: Court and said that, no, this is a case where she's been brainwashed and love jihad, basic
[Amit Varma]: love jihad narrative.
[Amit Varma]: And this woman was forcibly separated from her husband and effectively kidnapped by whoever's
[Amit Varma]: custody she was in at different points in time, whether it's her parents or the warden
[Guest 1]: of whatever, but it's basically abduction.
[Amit Varma]: The state abducted an adult woman.
[Guest 2]: That's what happened.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: And the high court remanded her back to her parents' custody, which was just absurd because
[Guest 2]: he basically kept her under house arrest.
[Guest 2]: She couldn't go out.
[Guest 2]: She couldn't meet people.
[Guest 2]: It was quite at least referred to the Supreme Court because she appealed against her husband,
[Guest 2]: I think was because she, how could she appeal, meaning she was in house arrest.
[Guest 2]: Her husband was the one who appealed.
[Guest 2]: So in fact, in the case until recently, she was, I think, like the ninth petition or something
[Guest 2]: like that.
[Guest 2]: She's been bumped up to two or three.
[Guest 1]: Well, you know, Hadia is just a woman my age.
[Guest 1]: What does she know about what she wants and what she doesn't want?
[Amit Varma]: And this is again, a classic contemporary, ongoing example of a woman being denied her
[Amit Varma]: agency.
[Amit Varma]: If, you know, if the state was to do this to a man, it would, you know, there would
[Amit Varma]: be a whole different spin on the whole thing.
[Amit Varma]: But she's a woman.
[Amit Varma]: She goes from the custody of the husband to a custody of her parents, to the custody of
[Amit Varma]: some male warden somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: It's like she's a piece of property and while they dispute who owns her, she is flung around
[Amit Varma]: the separate custodians.
[Guest 2]: So in fact, the case is going to be heard very fittingly on March 8th this week.
[Guest 2]: And but in the previous instance, she'd filed an affidavit in front of the court saying
[Guest 2]: because they weren't really asking her that I did this voluntary.
[Guest 2]: I love my husband.
[Guest 2]: Can I please stay with my husband?
[Guest 2]: He's my husband.
[Guest 2]: I want to stay with him.
[Guest 2]: And it's like, why I married him, disregarded.
[Guest 1]: You know, what drives me about this is something that a lot of people say, when India got independent,
[Guest 1]: there was universal adult franchise.
[Guest 1]: Women were allowed to vote in India, much before women in several other countries were
[Guest 1]: allowed to vote.
[Guest 1]: And it gets me to thinking about how, when slavery was still legal in the United States,
[Guest 1]: slaves were counted as three fifths of a man's property.
[Guest 1]: So they didn't have the vote, but they were counted as part of his property, which seems
[Guest 1]: to me not very different from the way we look at women today.
[Guest 1]: You may have the right to vote, but you're still part of a man's property.
[Guest 1]: You don't know enough for yourself.
[Guest 1]: This is the Indian state being paternalistic, telling its women that they have no clue what
[Guest 1]: they want, that they're barely human.
[Guest 1]: And just let the adult males decide everything that you want.
[Amit Varma]: And the most heartbreaking word in all of what you said is today.
[Amit Varma]: On that note, I think we'll end the episode Madhav and Hamsini, thanks so much for being
[Amit Varma]: on the show.
[Guest 2]: I learned a lot from you guys.
[Guest 2]: Thanks so much.
[Guest 2]: Thanks for letting me be here.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed this episode, you can follow Madhav on Twitter at madchap88.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, wait a minute.
[Amit Varma]: That's madchap88, much simpler.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Hamsini at Hamsini H. I also strongly recommend you check out the Pragati
[Amit Varma]: podcast, which Hamsini co-hosts with our colleague Pawan Srinath.
[Amit Varma]: You can find it by going to the online magazine Pragati at thinkpragati.com and clicking on
[Amit Varma]: the podcast tab.
[Amit Varma]: For archival episodes of the Seen and the Unseen, head on over to seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Both the Seen and the Unseen and the Pragati podcast, by the way, are produced in association
[Amit Varma]: with IVM podcast.
[Amit Varma]: So we have more than 20 great podcasts that I recommend you check out.
[Amit Varma]: You can listen to them all on the IVM podcast app.
[Unknown]: Goodbye for now.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the Seen and the Unseen, it makes complete sense for you to
[Amit Varma]: check out the Pragati podcast, a show on public policy.
[Amit Varma]: Pragati is a magazine I edit and the Pragati podcast is hosted by two of my colleagues,
[Amit Varma]: Pawan Srinath and Hamsini Hariharan.
[Amit Varma]: Every week, Pawan and Hamsini analyze views and news from India and the world and talk
[Amit Varma]: to experts and practitioners on a wide range of issues.
[Amit Varma]: Episodes out every Thursday.
[Amit Varma]: So there's your midweek fix right there.
[Unknown]: He bends down to test the warm water for his bath.
[Unknown]: He comes here to quench his thirst for a hot shower and some podcasts.
[Unknown]: You can witness how he enjoys having other people talk about cool stuff in his bathroom.
[Unknown]: Indeed, it helps him with his loneliness.
[Unknown]: You can find more of his species on ivmpodcast.com, your one-stop destination where you can check
[Unknown]: out the coolest Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: Happy listening!